---
title: 'Pilot'
date: 2025-05-25
permalink: /posts/2025/05/25
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

I hope to post some stuff related to Algorithms, Machine Learning, Finance, Probability, Statistics as well as certain academic inspirations and traveling experiences on this page.

---

---
title: 'A Cool Probability Problem'
date: 2025-05-29
permalink: /posts/2025/05/29
tags:
  - problems
---

The book *Fifty Challenging Problems in Probability* by Frederick Mosteller is one of my favorites in the subject. The way he describes the solutions is very intuitive, and I would strongly urge you to get a copy if you haven’t already. It’s great for intellectually curious minds. Mosteller believed that these kinds of “game” problems actually helped him with more serious problems he was working on at the time.

Anyway, on my flight to Chicago, I came across Question 11 in this book, which is open-ended. The problem, rephrased, states:

> If you and a stranger are separately asked to choose one positive whole number, and told that if you both choose the same number you win, otherwise you lose, which number would you choose? You have no contact with the other person. Just a random guess. Don’t give a long answer.

In his discussion, Dr. Mosteller mentions that most people are inclined to say “1, 3, 7,” and seldom any two-digit numbers.

So, I asked my friends and family (about 25 of them) independently. Most answered 1 (a great choice indeed); some answered 5 and 7. An interesting response came from two friends who said 10, and one friend who said 25. I had some great discussions with them on the plane based on this (thank you Delta Airlines for the free WiFi and some great convos in the air). The person who said 25 initially thought there was a range, like 1–100. They were of the opinion that quarters are generally more natural choices, and in this case, 25 is a quarter of 100. This got me thinking: often, when a problem is unbounded, we resort to the most trivial answer, but what if a range or bound is given? How do we rationalize our choices? What if we increased the range—would we be inclined to say 500 in that case?

A few friends who said 7 thought it was mathematically a very “pretty” answer and assumed the other person would think so as well. A friend of mine was of the opinion that this is a psychological rather than a mathematical problem, due to the biases that affect your answers and what you think of the other person’s mathematical reasoning abilities. Thus, your answer could say a lot about your thought process. This sparked a great discussion, and I was of the opinion that if we were to statistically estimate the best answer, it should have just been the trivial 1.

Anyway, it’s a great read, and the other problems in the book are equally exciting. A thin booklet, but truly a treasure of knowledge.